Parallel to this Japanese initiative a publishing committee was established in 1976 be-
tween scholars from the Netherlands, Taiwan and Japan to collate, annotate and publish
those diaries of the Zeelandia castle headquarters of the Dutch colony of Formosa (1624-
1662) which have survived. The basis for this work was laid in Taiwan during the 1950’s,
but the main task of collating, editing and annotating has been carried out in recent years
in Holland with the financial aid of the Foundation for the Promotion of Advanced Re-
search (ZWO), Leiden University and the Van den Bergh van Heemsteede foundation.

The keeping of the Zeelandia diaries was started by the third governor, Hans Putmans,
when he assumed office in the summer of 1629 and was continued down to the last days
of Dutch presence on the island in February 1662. As can be seen from the graph produced
in the Dutch introduction to the text, about half of the diaries has been preserved. The
present volume, which deals with the years 1629-1641, constitutes the first volume of a
series of four.

Directions for use

Although this source publication is primarily meant for historians who can read 17th cen-
tury Dutch, the editors have striven to render it also possible to readers who have little
or no knowledge of the Dutch language to look up the desired information with the help
of a dictionary by way of the very extensive indices. The hiati that have been created by
the disappearance of certain diaries, have been filled in by the editors with short rsums
drawn up from the resolutions of the Governor and his council, the correspondence be-
tween the Governor of Formosa and his inferiors on the island, as well as his correspon-
dence with the Governor-General in Batavia. All the diaries which have been preserved
in manuscript will be completely edited and published. For the transcription the editors
have adhered to the rules of the Nederlands Historisch Genootschap (the Dutch Historical
Society) and the Wade-Giles transcription.

Above every page, in addition to the pagination of this volume itself, the reader will
find a capital letter, which refers to the successive manuscripts of the Journal, followed
by the folio number within the manuscript. In addition the dates covered by the page in
question are given. The indices refer to the folio number of the manuscript, not to the
pagination of this volume.

Annotation

Occasionally letters or resolutions are referred to in the diaries. If they have been preser-
ved in today’s archives, the editors have provided the findingplace. The absence of such
a reference automatically means that the editors have not found it either in the VOC archi-
ve or in the other collections of the National Archives, since a large number of local docu-
ments were not sent to the Netherlands.

Only those persons about whom the editors have been able to find additional informati-
on outside the text, have been provided with succinct biographical data. For only a few
persons of Formosan, Chinese or Japanese extraction have we been able to find sufficient
information.

The identification of Formosan placenames is a problem per se. The names used in the
text are the ones that were used by the local population, which did not speak Chinese but
totally different languages belonging to the Austronesian language family. From the late
17th century onwards the original inhabitants of the Formosan plains were either driven
away or fully incorporated by the Han-Chinese settlers that migrated to Formosa from
the mainland provinces Fu-chien and Kwang-tung. Only in scattered settlements in the

XIX
