SUMMARY

Introduction

In between 1624 and 1662 the employees of the Dutch East India Company (VOC) in For-
mosa were witness to the radical political, economic and social change that took place in
the neighbouring empires of China and Japan. The shogunate, in pursuance of political
autarky, subjected the external commerce of Japan to severe limitations, and closed the
doors to all foreigners with the exception of a limited number of Dutch, Chinese and Ko-
rean traders. In China the Ming dynasty was overthrown and a new government was set
up under Manchu leadership in 1644. However, for several decades resistance by Ming-
loyalists continued in the southern coastal provinces. One of the most outspoken enemies
to the new government, the warlord Cheng Ch'eng-kung (Coxinga in Dutch sources), fi-
nally had to withdraw his headquarters from Amoy and moved to Formosa. After a siege
of several months he forced the Dutch to surrender, so that they had to give up their head-
quarters on the island, Zeelandia castle, in February 1662.

Cheng Ch'eng-kung was the son of the famous Cheng Chih-lung alias Iquan, a native
from the tiny fishing village of Shih-ching who had made a meteoric rise from maritime
trader in Japan, interpreter to the Dutch and pirate to military commander of Fu-chien
province. As a result of his extensive trade with Japan, the Dutch on Formosa and the
Spanish in Manilla, Iquan succeeded in building up the imposing maritime trade empire
which would later finance the military campaigns of his son. Iquan surrendered in 1646
to the Ch'ing government and remained in his original military function in Fu-chien, until
he was transferred to the imperial capital, Peking. Eventually he was impeached on ac-
count of the resistance struggle that was pursued by his brothers and his son in Fu-chien
province and executed in 1661.

It is by now well known that the 17th century archival materials of the Dutch East India
Company are of great importance to students of East Asian History who would like to
fill in the gaps in our present knowledge of the coastal regions of East Asia in this period.
Due to deliberate policies of the then reigning governments as well as due to the ravages
of time, few Chinese and Japanese source materials from this particular period have survi-
ved. The appetite of many historians of Asia has been wetted by Dutch source publicati-
ons like the Diaries of Batavia Castle (Daghregisters van het Casteel Batavia) and the so-
called Generale Missiven, the bi-annual reports sent by the Governors-General in Batavia
to the Board of Directors in the Netherlands. All references concerning China and Japan
in the Diaries already have been translated into Japanese and Chinese, even though this
scattered information is little else than a collection of extracts of letters received in Batavia
from East Asia, shipping movements and occasional news that was received from these
quarters. The Generale Missiven which offer a better organised overall survey of the
events still await closer attention by non-Dutch scholars.

It should be pointed out that there are much more detailed sources concerning the
events in the Far East: the correspondence that was exchanged between the local represen-
tatives of the VOC and the Governor-General in Batavia and the Diaries that were kept
by the factory-chiefs themselves in Japan and Formosa. The diaries of the Hirado factory
and, from 1641 onwards, the Deshima factory in Japan are now being published in Dutch
and Japanese annotated editions by the Historiographical Institute of Tokyo University,
a formidable enterprise which may take more than a hundred years to complete.

XVIII
